README.md, before:

# Concurrent trie-hash map

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/rmind/thmap.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/rmind/thmap)

Concurrent trie-hash map library -- a general purpose hash map, combining
the elements of hashing and radix trie.  Highlights:
- Very competitive performance, with logarithmic time complexity on average.
- Lookups are lock-free and inserts/deletes are using fine-grained locking.
- Incremental growth of the data structure (no large resizing/rehashing).
- Optional support for use with shared memory, e.g. memory-mapped file.

The implementation is written in C11 and distributed under the 2-clause
BSD license.

NOTE: Delete operations (the key/data destruction) must be synchronised
with the readers using garbage collection.  You can use the Epoch-based
Reclamation (EBR) library provided [HERE](https://github.com/rmind/libqsbr).

References:

- [P. Bagwell, 2001, Ideal Hash Trees, EPFL Technical Report
](http://lampwww.epfl.ch/papers/idealhashtrees.pdf)

- [P. L. Lehman and S. B. Yao.
Efficient locking for concurrent operations on B-trees
ACM TODS, 6(4):650–670, 1981
](https://www.csd.uoc.gr/~hy460/pdf/p650-lehman.pdf)

- [W. Litwin, 1981, Trie Hashing. Proceedings of the 1981 ACM SIGMOD, p. 19-29
](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=582322)

## API

* `thmap_t *thmap_create(uintptr_t baseptr, const thmap_ops_t *ops, unsigned flags)`
  * Construct a new trie-hash map.  The optional `ops` parameter can
  used to set the custom allocate/free operations (see the description
  of `thmap_ops_t` below).  In such case, the `baseptr` is the base (start)
  address of the address space mapping (it must be word-aligned).  If `ops`
  is set to `NULL`, then _malloc(3)_ and _free(3)_ will be used as the
  default operations and `baseptr` should be
  set to zero.  Currently, the supported `flags` are:
    * `THMAP_NOCOPY`: the keys on insert will not be copied and the given
    pointers to them will be expected to be valid and the values constant
    until the key is deleted; by default, the put operation will make a
    copy of the key.

* `void thmap_destroy(thmap_t *hmap)`
  * Destroy the map, freeing the memory it uses.

* `void *thmap_get(thmap_t *hmap, const void *key, size_t len)`
  * Lookup the key (of a given length) and return the value associated with it.
  Return `NULL` if the key is not found (see the caveats section).

* `void *thmap_put(thmap_t *hmap, const void *key, size_t len, void *val)`
  * Insert the key with an arbitrary value.  If the key is already present,
  return the already existing associated value without changing it.
  Otherwise, on a successful insert, return the given value.  Just compare
  the result against `val` to test whether the insert was successful.

* `void *thmap_del(thmap_t *hmap, const void *key, size_t len)`
  * Remove the given key.  If the key was present, return the associated
  value; otherwise return `NULL`.

The `thmap_ops_t` structure has the following members:
* `uintptr_t (*alloc)(size_t len)`
  * Function to allocate the memory.  Must return an address to the
  memory area of the size `len`.  The address must be relative to the
  base address specified during map creation and must be word-aligned.
* `void (*free)(uintptr_t addr, size_t len)`
  * Function to release the memory.  Must take a previously allocated
  address (relative to the base) and release the memory area.  The `len`
  is guaranteed to match the original allocation length.

## Notes

Internally, offsets from the base pointer are used to organise the access
to the data structure.  This allows user to store the data structure in the
shared memory, using the allocation/free functions.  The keys will also be
copied using the custom functions; if `THMAP_NOCOPY` is set, then the keys
must belong to the same shared memory object.

The implementation was extensively tested on a 24-core x86 machine,
see [the stress test](src/t_stress.c) for the details on the technique.

## Caveats

* The implementation uses pointer tagging and atomic operations.  This
requires the base address and the allocations to provide at least word
alignment.

* While the `NULL` values may be inserted, `thmap_get` and `thmap_del`
cannot indicate whether the key was not found or a key with a NULL value
was found.  If the caller needs to indicate an "empty" value, it can use a
special pointer value, such as `(void *)(uintptr_t)0x1`.

## Example

Simple case backed by _malloc(3)_, which could be used in multi-threaded
environment:
```c
thmap_t *kvmap;
struct obj *obj;

kvmap = thmap_create(0, NULL);
assert(kvmap != NULL);
...
obj = obj_create();
thmap_put(kvmap, "test", sizeof("test") - 1, obj);
...
obj = thmap_get(kvmap, "test", sizeof("test") - 1);
...
thmap_destroy(kvmap);
```

## Packages

Just build the package, install it and link the library using the
`-lthmap` flag.
* RPM (tested on RHEL/CentOS 7): `cd pkg && make rpm`
* DEB (tested on Debian 9): `cd pkg && make deb`

Commit message:

Add thmap_stage_gc(); improve documentation.

README.md, after:

# Concurrent trie-hash map

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/rmind/thmap.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/rmind/thmap)

Concurrent trie-hash map library -- a general purpose hash map, combining
the elements of hashing and radix trie.  Highlights:
- Very competitive performance, with logarithmic time complexity on average.
- Lookups are lock-free and inserts/deletes are using fine-grained locking.
- Incremental growth of the data structure (no large resizing/rehashing).
- Optional support for use with shared memory, e.g. memory-mapped file.

The implementation is written in C11 and distributed under the 2-clause
BSD license.

NOTE: Delete operations (the key/data destruction) must be synchronised with
the readers using some reclamation mechanism.  You can use the Epoch-based
Reclamation (EBR) library provided [HERE](https://github.com/rmind/libqsbr).

References:

- [P. L. Lehman and S. B. Yao.
Efficient locking for concurrent operations on B-trees
ACM TODS, 6(4):650-670, 1981
](https://www.csd.uoc.gr/~hy460/pdf/p650-lehman.pdf)

- [W. Litwin, 1981, Trie Hashing. Proceedings of the 1981 ACM SIGMOD, p. 19-29
](https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=582322)

## API

* `thmap_t *thmap_create(uintptr_t baseptr, const thmap_ops_t *ops, unsigned flags)`
  * Construct a new trie-hash map.  The optional `ops` parameter can
  used to set the custom allocate/free operations (see the description
  of `thmap_ops_t` below).  In such case, the `baseptr` is the base (start)
  address of the address space mapping (it must be word-aligned).  If `ops`
  is set to `NULL`, then _malloc(3)_ and _free(3)_ will be used as the
  default operations and `baseptr` should be
  set to zero.  Currently, the supported `flags` are:
    * `THMAP_NOCOPY`: the keys on insert will not be copied and the given
    pointers to them will be expected to be valid and the values constant
    until the key is deleted; by default, the put operation will make a
    copy of the key.

* `void thmap_destroy(thmap_t *hmap)`
  * Destroy the map, freeing the memory it uses.

* `void *thmap_get(thmap_t *hmap, const void *key, size_t len)`
  * Lookup the key (of a given length) and return the value associated with it.
  Return `NULL` if the key is not found (see the caveats section).

* `void *thmap_put(thmap_t *hmap, const void *key, size_t len, void *val)`
  * Insert the key with an arbitrary value.  If the key is already present,
  return the already existing associated value without changing it.
  Otherwise, on a successful insert, return the given value.  Just compare
  the result against `val` to test whether the insert was successful.

* `void *thmap_del(thmap_t *hmap, const void *key, size_t len)`
  * Remove the given key.  If the key was present, return the associated
  value; otherwise return `NULL`.  The memory associated with the entry is
  not released immediately, because in the concurrent environment (e.g.
  multi-threaded application) the caller may need to ensure it is safe to
  do so.  It is managed using the `thmap_stage_gc` and `thmap_gc` routines.

* `void *thmap_stage_gc(thmap_t *hmap)`
  * Stage the currently pending entries (the memory not yet released after
  the deletion) for reclamation (G/C).  This operation should be called
  **before** the synchronisation barrier.
  * Returns a reference which must be passed to `thmap_gc`.  Not calling the
  G/C function for the returned reference would result in a memory leak.

* `void thmap_gc(thmap_t *hmap, void *ref)`
  * Reclaim (G/C) the staged entries i.e. release any memory associated
  with the deleted keys.  The reference must be the value returned by the
  call to `thmap_stage_gc`.
  * This function must be called **after** the synchronisation barrier which
  guarantees that there are no active readers referencing the staged entries.

The `thmap_ops_t` structure has the following members:
* `uintptr_t (*alloc)(size_t len)`
  * Function to allocate the memory.  Must return an address to the
  memory area of the size `len`.  The address must be relative to the
  base address specified during map creation and must be word-aligned.
* `void (*free)(uintptr_t addr, size_t len)`
  * Function to release the memory.  Must take a previously allocated
  address (relative to the base) and release the memory area.  The `len`
  is guaranteed to match the original allocation length.

## Notes

Internally, offsets from the base pointer are used to organise the access
to the data structure.  This allows user to store the data structure in the
shared memory, using the allocation/free functions.  The keys will also be
copied using the custom functions; if `THMAP_NOCOPY` is set, then the keys
must belong to the same shared memory object.

The implementation was extensively tested on a 24-core x86 machine,
see [the stress test](src/t_stress.c) for the details on the technique.

## Caveats

* The implementation uses pointer tagging and atomic operations.  This
requires the base address and the allocations to provide at least word
alignment.

* While the `NULL` values may be inserted, `thmap_get` and `thmap_del`
cannot indicate whether the key was not found or a key with a NULL value
was found.  If the caller needs to indicate an "empty" value, it can use a
special pointer value, such as `(void *)(uintptr_t)0x1`.

## Example

Simple case backed by _malloc(3)_, which could be used in multi-threaded
environment:
```c
thmap_t *kvmap;
struct obj *obj;

kvmap = thmap_create(0, NULL);
assert(kvmap != NULL);
...
obj = obj_create();
thmap_put(kvmap, "test", sizeof("test") - 1, obj);
...
obj = thmap_get(kvmap, "test", sizeof("test") - 1);
...
thmap_destroy(kvmap);
```

## Packages

Just build the package, install it and link the library using the
`-lthmap` flag.
* RPM (tested on RHEL/CentOS 7): `cd pkg && make rpm`
* DEB (tested on Debian 9): `cd pkg && make deb`
